Session 211, OpenGL Optimization: Live.
I'm Dave Springer.
This is Chris Niederauer.
So it's 3:30 on Thursday.
This is like nearly the
last day of the conference,
right?
You guys have been here a long time.
You feeling a little conference burn?
Here's a thought that keeps me going.
In the whole of human history,
there's been appointed one Dave Springer.
And for my life, my entire life,
I get to be him.
We're going to talk about a couple
tools that we developed at Apple:
OpenGL Profiler and
OpenGL Driver Monitor.
And we're going to have live demos,
because we like to live on the edge.
And this software you
see is pretty fresh,
right?
Pretty fresh.
So anything could happen at any time.
But what we're going to
do during these demos,
and we're going to do it,
is show some of the performance
bottlenecks that we've seen that
are common among OpenGL apps.
So we get a lot of applications
come through the shop,
and we see a lot of
things like immediate mode,
when display list might
be more appropriate.
We see things like texture upload
usage that could be a little better.
We see state changes that
aren't always necessary.
So also, we'll show you about how to
debug your OpenGL applications
using these tools as well.
Okay.
Now, why did we build this tool?
Well, really,
it's -- those were the issues that
we were running into all the time.
We see a lot of performance problems
and we notice common themes.
So we built this tool to quickly
identify those areas where you're maybe
losing performance in your OpenGL apps.
Also,
there was a lot of common misconceptions
about why performance is being lost.
A lot of people would,
you get a lot of finger pointing.
Well,
now we have a tool that will exactly
measure and precisely identify
where the performance is going.
So what does it do?
Profiler will show your usage
of the OpenGL engine library.
Collect a lot of data
and a lot of statistics.
You can also control your application
kind of like a debugger level.
And we'll also show the graphic state
that your application has in it.
And we'll get into what all
that really means in the demos.
Okay, now here's how Profiler works.
Now I've got to refer
to my cheat sheet here,
because my memory is like a sieve,
and besides, this makes it look like
I prepared beforehand.
Profiler is a runtime system.
What happens is it gets in between
your app and the OpenGL engine.
You don't have to
recompile your application,
run it in a special mode,
or anything like that.
Profiler really does work
like a debugger in that sense,
in that you can just run your app
under the Profiler environment.
And now how it does it is
that Profiler gets into the
OpenGL library at the library level
and wraps all those functions.
So imagine like in the old
days you just have jump tables,
dynamically loaded libraries.
Get in there and masquerade each
one of those function calls to go
into Profiler and then from there
into the engine or to the CGL shim.
And it does wrap both CGL,
which is our OS dependent layer
of OpenGL and also OpenGL.
And there's a quick note
under the X window system.
If you're using that platform,
you actually end up profiling the server,
not your client app.
Because it's a runtime system like this,
it means that you can launch an
app under Profiler and then using
GDB or another favorite debugger,
you can attach to that same app.
So you can have a full debugger at the
same time that you're running Profiler.
There's some little tricks in how
to keep it synchronized there and
you'd have to experiment with that.
That's an exercise to the reader.
Okay, here's a screenshot.
This is all new for Tiger, Profiler 3.0.
First thing we did was take
the two-panel approach,
startup approach that we used to have,
and compress it into one panel.
So now there's no start and then
start and then really start.
This is, you select your app at the top.
Now let me get these fancy builds.
There we go.
You, first of all,
set up the app that you want to
profile in this top table here.
If you click "Attach," that table's
automatically populated with all the
running applications on your system.
You can, in the new 3.0 profiler,
set environment variables.
This window, by the way, is open large.
This doesn't default to this size.
Normally, this part of it is hidden
when you run profiler.
You can set a custom pixel format,
which I'll talk about more later.
You can emulate sort of graphics drivers.
Again, I'll talk about that
in more detail later.
New for Tiger,
you can set environment variables.
Like you can if you're
launching from a shell in Unix,
you can set environment variables
that you then get inside your app.
Now you can do it right from profiler.
I do this all the time to
tell my target app to launch
different dynamic libraries,
like debug versions of a framework,
for example.
You can do that through
environment variables.
Okay, and the third part of
this panel is down here.
The most important part, really,
of this panel is the frame rate.
Now, this is an out-of-the-gate
estimation of your app's performance.
It's not a real precise, nailed-down,
"This is what my performance
really is," but this is going
to give you a general idea.
Oh yeah,
I'm getting about 200 frames per second,
and I'm expecting 500.
Okay, so that's what that gives you.
Now, let me get into some of
the things that we collect.
This is the data that Profiler
gathers out of your app.
It takes the amount of time that
you actually spend in OpenGL Engine.
So when you make a call,
we start a timer, go into the engine,
come out of the engine, stop the timer,
add all those up.
So this is a pretty precise measurement
of your actual usage of the engine.
"Per call." Now these
are cumulative values,
and they are also,
but they are per context or global.
So you can see globally if you have a
lot of threads and a lot of context,
you can see globally how much
time you're spending in functions,
or you can look at it
per context as well.
Now, one of the really important numbers
on this panel here is the estimated
percent time spent in OpenGL Engine.
And here we're spending
about a quarter of the time.
If the app is 100%, we're spending
about a quarter of the time
actually in GL-- in other words,
on the GPU.
Now, what this number is
going to tell you is--
"Profiler, the tool you want to keep
using to measure performance,
or do you want to move on to something
like Shark and the Chud tools in order to
work on your performance on the CPU side?
And we'll go into more detail later
about how to balance those two off.
Okay, with that,
I'm going to turn it over to Chris,
who's going to show us a demo." "Okay,
so we're on computer number three.
Okay, that's good.
So here's the new Profiler window,
and as we see,
it's actually a little bit smaller
than what we saw in Dave's screenshot.
This is how it starts up by default.
So we've constructed an application that
shows some of the common pitfalls that
we see with a lot of the applications
today that use OpenGL on Mac OS X.
And so this application, we call it,
what did we call it?
Trytip Bandit.
That is its name.
We wrote that it will use
this in OpenGL Profiler,
use these tools and
improve its performance.
So one of the first things that
you generally want to do is you
want to figure out what percentage
of the time your application
is spending in OpenGL and what
it's doing with that time.
So we've got the applications
right here ready to launch.
And so launch that.
So we've got it showing up here.
It's just running as it would normally
if I were to start it from the finder.
And one thing you may notice is we
already have the frame rate is already
showing in the bottom of the profiler
panel because it's non-invasively able
to capture the calls of OpenGL and
it's displaying this information.
So we're saying we're getting around
33 frames per second right now.
So let's go and find out where
that time is going to make
that 33 frames per second.
So I'm going to check the statistics,
collect statistics right here.
[Transcript missing]
So what I'm going to do is I'm
going to disable that function.
So let's go--
So I'm going to open up
the breakpoints window.
And this window gives a list
of all the functions of OpenGL.
And you can control them
through different ways.
We're going to show you how-- if
you don't understand all of it yet,
don't worry.
We're going to go over how
to use this window in depth a
little bit further later on.
So I'm going to look for glFinish.
We see the command here.
And I can simply-- we
see this column execute,
and I'm going to simply
turn off that column.
And we see already in our
statistics that it's turned red,
which means that we're no
longer calling that function.
So I'm going to clear this, recheck,
and we can confirm that glFinish
is no longer in the statistics.
So we're already--
It's about 5% faster from what I've
measured just by taking out the function.
It allows you to do this all on the fly.
So, let's see.
So with that, back to you, Dave.
Thanks, Chris.
OK, I want to mention here that Chris and
I work about 200 miles apart or so.
And I have never seen
this demo until now.
And it was awesome.
So thanks.
It was awesome.
Okay,
let's go on to another section of usage
data that we harvest with Profiler.
This is a call trace.
In the last demo, you saw that we capture
every function and time it.
And in this usage data capture,
we grab every function as
you call it and store it.
So you've got a whole trace
of all the GL function calls
you make as you make them.
And you can see here that the
output is kind of C-style.
You couldn't actually just take,
grab this and compile it and get errors.
But it does print out the
symbolic names of the parameters.
So that makes it a little easier to read.
And I want to point out a
couple new features for Tiger.
One is that you can apply
a filter to this trace.
A couple of you guys,
developers out there, had this excellent,
excellent idea of taking this text
and running it through various
Python and Perl scripts to come
up with statistical analysis.
And that was built right in.
So you just say,
"Enable filter." You pick the filter
and it'll push it right through
there and show you your output.
The other thing that we have
on here that's new for Tiger is
timing information per function.
So before you saw in the statistics
window that the timing information is
cumulative for all the function calls.
So when it read GL vertex 3F,
for example,
that timing information is the sum
of all your GL vertex 3F calls.
In this case,
you get the time for just the
individual one that's on this list.
Now what that's really useful
for is finding hotspots.
Because you might have instances,
for example, of CGL flush drawable.
I'm just pulling this out of the air.
That might take a short amount
of time and one or two that
are super long because of state
changes and things like that.
Well, on the stats window,
it's going to show up
as taking a long time.
Cumulatively.
But what you really want to do
is narrow down those one or two
that are really soaking up all the
time and figure out why that is.
Well, this timing information that
is coming in Tiger will enable
you to find those really fast.
Plus, attached to each one of these lines
will be a reveal for a full backtrace.
So you can click on the function
and find out where in your code
that specific call was made.
narrow it down.
And again,
this is all per context or global.
So if you have a bunch of contexts,
you can narrow it down to looking at
function calls just in one context.
Okay, and I think with that we're going
to turn it back over to Chris.
So back to computer three?
Thanks.
So I've got here,
I have a second application here which
I've already taken the finish out of
and I'm going to demonstrate how to
more effectively pass down vertices
through your application to OpenGL.
So let's launch this
application up again.
And so, as Dave was showing,
OpenGL Profiler allows you
to get the trace of all the
OpenGL functions that are being called.
And I'm going to go ahead and do that.
So, let's click this button,
"Create Trace." And I'm going
to stop that because otherwise
I might fill up hard drive.
So, looking through this trace,
we see that there's a
lot of vertex begin-end,
basically, calls.
That type of call.
So, GL begin, GL vertex, GL vertex,
GL vertex, GL end.
And this is actually, for static data,
this is a, actually, it's more,
it would be more efficient to use
display lists for this particular case.
For instance,
the land here is all static,
yet I'm passing it down
through immediate mode.
And so,
what I'm going to change about it is
you can either add vertex array range,
vertex buffer object, display lists.
All of these allow you
to effectively pick,
you can pick the type that you feel
is most appropriate for the type of
data that you're trying to draw with.
And use that to more efficiently
take advantage of the video.
More efficiently take advantage
of the bandwidth of the system.
So, one thing to note is when
you do have all these calls,
like, immediate mode requires a lot of
calls with all the begin-ends.
Versus if you were to
say use a display list,
which is a single call, GL call list.
So, again, also as John Stauffer went
over in his talk earlier today
on optimization in general.
And so, that's a little bit of
a different approach.
But, in the case of a display list,
you can use CGL macros to,
in order to cut down on the
overhead that each function call,
basically the overhead of
making the function call itself.
So, in the case where,
in this particular application,
simply switching to CGL macros
will definitely get us a gain,
a good gain.
But, I've already written this
to use display lists.
And, well, first let's check out
the statistics again.
And we can see, sorting by the GL time,
that we've got vertex 3f, tech cord 2f,
vertex 3d, color 4f, begin-end.
All these calls are immediate calls.
And so, let's launch, well.
And so we get about 35 frames per second.
So I'm going to stop this application.
Start up one using display
lists vertex array range.
And that alone, we're already up to 160,
170 frames per second.
165.
Simply by passing the data using
display list vertex array range.
Let's go back to statistics.
And now we see that we're
actually... So most of our time
is being spent in GL Call List,
and then the rest of the time,
most of the rest of the time is
being spent in CGL Flush Drawable,
which basically means it's
waiting for the video card to
stick more data back on it.
So we've pretty effectively used
OpenGL on the CPU side right now.
So back to you.
All right, thanks, Chris.
All right, let's move on to application
control and some of these features
that are in Profiler for this.
One of the ways you can control your
app is by setting a custom pixel format.
And what we do here is--.
"How to inject a different
pixel format than what you asked
for in your code." So again,
this is without recompiling
your application or
changing any code like that.
We can do things, for example,
change the depth buffer size.
So you want to see if your
app will run with a 16-bit
Z-buffer instead of a 32-bit.
You can do that through Profiler
without having to rerun your app.
Or recompile your app, I mean.
You have to rerun it.
The other thing you can do is
what we call driver emulation.
We don't actually fully emulate the
graphics drivers because we can't.
It's hardware, there's all kinds of
stuff involved in there.
But what we can do in Profiler as a
runtime system is get in the way of
the GL get calls and make it seem
like you're running on another card.
So this is useful if you
want to make sure your app is
following correct code paths.
For example,
you've got different code paths
depending on the return from
a GL get string because you're
looking at different card features.
And you're going to enable or
disable certain functions in menus.
I see this in games all the time.
You're going to change a menu that
allows you to turn on certain features.
and David DeRose, the team of developers,
are here to discuss
the OpenGL application.
[Transcript missing]
"Your app thinks it's something else,
an NVIDIA card, and really it's an ATI.
So you use it with care,
but it does have use.
Now another way we can
control the application
Chris already showed in his demo,
GL Finish, is that you can enable
and disable GL calls.
So you want to see what your app looks
like without ever calling GL Finish,
just turn it off.
And you saw that the app
not only looked the same,
but ran way faster.
We can do that.
You can also attach
scripts at breakpoints.
Now,
what that means is you can write little
pieces of GL code and Profiler will take
and inject those into your application
at breakpoints while you run it.
And then we're going to see
an example of that later on.
Okay, this is the breakpoint window,
and Chris showed this earlier.
These, like a debugger,
you can set breakpoints.
But unlike a debugger,
you can only set them
on certain functions,
which is all the GL calls.
So this is not a general
debugger feature.
This is just a way to stop
your app on certain GL calls.
and the interesting thing
is that you can stop it just
before it goes into the engine,
or you can stop it right after
it comes back from the engine.
Why this is useful is because
along with a backtrace,
[Transcript missing]
And again,
this handles the multiple context case.
Now, what we do here, though, is,
you know, like a debugger,
if you have a bunch of threads
running and you put a breakpoint on,
you know, function foo,
then it's going to stop in every thread.
Well, it's the same here.
If you put a breakpoint on GL flush,
then it's going to stop at every
context and every thread that calls it.
Okay, and with that,
I'm going to go back to
Chris for catching OpenGL errors.
So, GL Profiler is good for breakpoints,
and one of those types of
breakpoints that you can set is
a breakpoint on any GL error.
So, what I'm going to do is run my
application this time with a breakpoint
set any time that GL error might occur.
So, I'm going to go up and
go back to the views,
set the breakpoints,
and we can see here we've
got a list of different types
of errors we can break on.
I'm going to break on error,
which refers to the normal GL error,
and let's start this program up.
So already, it's caught a geo error.
And it says that I'm calling geo
blend with geo blend equation,
when in fact,
blend equation is not something that's
supposed to be enabled and disabled.
Geo blend is more common-- is
actually what's supposed to be there.
So we get the error, geo invalid enum.
And we also see-- we can see the
backtrace and the actual line of code.
Somewhere here.
You can see the line of code
where this error is occurring.
And so using this, I was able to quickly
realize where this was,
fix it, correct it to GL Blend instead
of GL Blend equation.
And I'll show you the result.
We got one taker.
Let's see.
So the blending, that's actually,
if you notice the function backtrace,
that was in drawSky.
And so I had blending basically
was not enabled for that.
So let's start up the
version without errors.
I'll set that breakpoint again.
Let's see.
Break on error.
Start it up.
And as we can see,
it's not breaking on any errors,
and now we've got the
clouds blending pretty well.
Let's go back to you, Dave,
and you can explain some of the other
types of errors that you can break on.
Thanks, Chris.
Okay, we saw breaking OpenGL errors.
Very useful.
Another way that you can trap these
errors in your app is on thread conflict.
John talked earlier
about multiple contexts,
multiple threads, and what's legal and
what's okay and what's not.
Well,
You can have more than one thread
talking to one single GL context,
but it's up to you to make sure that
the thread is locking correctly and
not in the context--not more than one
thread in the context at the same time.
If you end up with more than one
thread talking to the same context,
you can get all kinds of funky
data corruption problems and bad
things can happen to your computer.
So you don't want that.
Well,
Profiler,
what really is happening here in this
thread conflict is that you are supposed
to have the mutex locks on the threads
if you're going to talk to one context.
Profiler has this mode where it applies
the locks that you're supposed to have.
So if you get into the case where
threads are going to conflict,
it'll trip over one of those
locks and stop and say,
"Hey, you know, there's an error here."
Then you can go back into your app,
again by using the back trace.
And you can apply the
locks and clean it up.
Personally, I recommend that you have
one context per thread,
but that's just my personal opinion.
Do what you want.
Now, this threading collision stuff is
only detected in the OpenGL APIs.
We don't detect it in the CGL layer.
So you're on your own there.
Another way we can detect errors is the
panel up there is a break on var error.
It stops on vertex array range
and vertex array object errors.
Essentially, these four points, in sum,
say, any time an index that you're using
to draw with veers outside of an
array range that you've specified,
or if you're going to hand in a pointer
that is outside of one of those ranges
that you haven't properly set up,
then we'll stop and we'll break.
And again, show you the back trace,
the full GL state,
everything you need to see.
And we validate your vertex
array range on any of these
functions that you see up there.
Okay, we talked about the full
snapshot of OpenGL state.
It is a full snapshot.
So every GL get call that you
can make is done right here.
And we put it in this list,
this reveal list.
Now what happens is that
the state is gathered,
it's harvested every time
you stop at a breakpoint.
And the changes in the
state are shown in red,
and the changes being
since the last breakpoint.
And to show that,
what I did here in this screenshot
is I've got a stop on glEnable
before it goes into the engine,
and then another stop
as soon as it comes out.
So what I would expect
is that it's glEnable,
so I would expect the
state to be turned on,
right, that I'm changing.
And that's in fact what happens.
You can see down here at the bottom
it says it broke after glEnable.
In other words,
it's gone into the engine,
it's come back out,
and it's stopped again.
And then you can see there that
the call face is now enabled.
So this is really useful for
detecting errors where you think you
have states set up that may not be,
or a state that's set
with incorrect values.
You can watch the change.
We've got another take for that.
Awesome.
Okay, just another quick,
couple quick points on this window.
There's,
under that Actions pull-down there,
these are just shortcut menu
options to stop everywhere before,
stop everywhere after, stop nowhere,
you know, it turns on all those buttons
or turns them all off.
You can also execute no GL functions.
So if you want to see,
and we've had examples
of this in the lab,
where people, you know,
your graphic is slow and my
app runs slow because your
graphic's just not up to par.
Well, so we said, "Okay,
we'll take your app,
we'll turn off all the graphics,
and notice it goes the same speed."
Guess what?
So you can run your app
open loop and decide,
oh, well, maybe I better get Shark and
Chud tools out and make that
go a little faster first before
I start blaming people randomly.
Not that I've ever done that.
And of course,
you can ignore all the breakpoints, too,
if you just want to run your
app without stopping anywhere.
Okay, now with that,
we'll turn it back over to
Chris and we'll talk about
unnecessary state changes.
So, already I talked about
the immediate mode.
I talked about how making a
lot of calls actually will
result in function overhead.
And the same holds
true for setting state.
Except there's also the fact that
setting state can also itself,
the actual setting of the state,
can take up time.
And even if the setting of the
state doesn't take up time,
you may not know,
but some of the state changes will
be deferred until your draw command.
And that will cause your draw
commands to go a little bit slower.
So, like in the statistics, for instance,
you'll see draw rays taking a longer
time than usual because you've
accidentally turned something on
or turned it on multiple times.
Or just switch some sort of state.
So, that's a state that you
didn't need to switch.
So, one thing that developers should
try and do is they should try and
avoid state changes when they can.
But they should also keep in mind
that OpenGL does keep track of,
as a state machine,
it is keeping track of what you're doing.
And depending on the type of
state that you're setting,
it may be more efficient for
you as a developer with the
semantics of the application.
So, that's a good thing.
And then, of course,
you can also use the state
change to decide whether or not
to do the state change yourself.
So, I'm going to launch up.
The application here.
And I'm going to go look at statistics.
And one thing I wanted to reiterate
that Dave said earlier was the
estimated percent time in GL is
a really useful feature to look at.
Like here we see the
applications taking 91% of the
application is going to OpenGL.
And sometimes,
so depending on your application,
that percentage will be different.
But for this particular application,
since I'm just pounding
on the graphics hardware,
I'm not doing anything that has to,
I'm not doing any CPU calculations such
as physics or anything similar to that.
So because of that, I have a pretty high
percentage of time in OpenGL.
Sometimes it's better to have a
higher percentage of OpenGL time
because that means that you're giving
more data to OpenGL in general.
So let's look at,
I wanted to look in particular
at the number of function calls.
With GL Enable and GL Disable.
And if you look at the number
of calls between those two,
you'll notice there's actually,
they're very different.
So there's 190,000 disabled calls
while there's only 125 enabled calls.
So obviously this is not necessary,
that means that there's some
sort of imbalance there.
And that's just one example of a
state change which is unnecessary.
So by taking that state change out,
you don't just gain the time
in the actual function itself,
like here, percent,
so the average time here is very
small here for the enable and disable.
However,
this time might be actually showing up
in your other calls such as gl_begin and
other similar function drawing commands.
So, back to you.
There's a 9600,
ATR 9600 card on a dual two.
Let's talk about some of the graphics
state that your application keeps.
There's a differentiation
between state in OpenGL,
which is a state machine,
and graphic state that
your application owns.
The difference being that your app
is going to own things like textures,
vertex programs, and as this slide shows,
a depth buffer, back buffer,
things like that.
It's not strictly
speaking GL engine state.
But because it's important,
especially when you're debugging
and in performance analysis,
to know what's going on with that state,
Profiler captures it all, too.
So this view is the depth buffer.
And what Profiler does
here is grab the Z-buffer,
the depth buffer, and then grayscales it.
Okay, so that on your gray scale here,
the black pixels are minimum z and
the white pixels are maximum z.
That slider at the top is
showing you your Z range.
When you get the depth buffer up
and you click that magnifying glass,
the profiler will automatically
analyze the image and say,
"All right,
your minimum Z value in the depth
buffer is such in this case 0.3 and 0.4,
and your maximum is 1." Now, in OpenGL,
the default
The first thing I want to say is
that the z values in the depth
buffer are always between 0 and 1.
There is a way to change that,
but generally speaking,
the values of the floating point range
of z in the depth buffer is 0 to 1.
The idea here is to show how
much Z precision you're using.
So there's one of the
common problems we run into,
which Chris is going to demo later on,
is something we call Z-fighting.
That's our colloquial term for it.
And how that manifests itself is you
get these little flashing polygons,
because there's not enough Z precision
to tell which part is in front and
which part is behind consistently.
And so you don't have enough
precision in your depth buffer.
The first step in how you can
see if you have enough precision
or not is by using this view.
And if that orange bar at
the top is really tiny,
then you've got almost no z-precision.
The wider that bar is,
the more z-precision you have.
So that's what you're striving for.
And the way that you affect z-precision
is by changing the near and far
planes in your GL frustum call.
You know, I want to,
this sometimes has been
a point of confusion,
especially on the OpenGL list I've seen,
where the values of z in the z-buffer,
the range of those values, I should say,
is not affected by GL frustum.
They always go from zero to one.
What changes,
what GL frustum changes is how many
of those bits you're going to use
for the zCompare and the zBuffer.
Make sense?
So in other words, you want to,
you don't want to have just the top two
bits being used for all your zComparers.
You want to try and get all 32 or
all 16 or whatever your depth is.
and your near and far plane are
going to be the determining factors
for how much precision you use.
The actual values are always 0 to 1.
The range is always 0 to 1.
Okay,
then another kind of buffer you can look
at with Profile is a stencil buffer.
What Profiler does is
pseudo-color the stencil planes.
The way you use a stencil buffer is
that you set individual bit planes.
So, Profiler, you can pseudo-color those.
On this example here,
we've got three bitplanes being
used in the stencil buffer.
And Profiler pseudo-colored
them with blue,
green, and red.
So,
you can see here there's an area of black
where there's no stencil bit set at all.
Then,
which planes have stencil bits set in
the red and the green and the blue?
And then where it's purple,
Profiler composites bitplanes together
and comes up with another pseudo-color.
So, the purple areas are where
you have red and blue set.
So, both of those bitplanes have
been set in your rendering there.
Now, other buffer views that you
can get are the back buffer.
And that's pretty straightforward.
It just looks like the front
buffer before it got swapped.
You can look at the alpha buffer,
which is also gray scale colored.
And you can look at all
your auxiliary buffers.
So depending on how many you asked
for in your pixel format or how
many the engine or card supports,
that's how many you can look at.
Buffer views are all static.
So they're just what
your app put in there.
You can't edit them and then
shove them back in and say,
oh, well, what happens if I really had
a Z precision range of much
bigger than I really do?
You can't do that.
It's just reporting what you did.
So it's just static images.
Okay, now with that,
turn it over to Chris.
So I'm going to show an example of
being able to look at those buffers.
So looking closely at this application,
we can see in the background where
the waters and the land is meeting.
The land doesn't quite look right.
It's not a smooth land.
There's not a smooth line there.
And what I think this is,
is I think it's Z-fighting.
So the way that I would check on this,
the first thing I would do is I'm going
to take a look at the depth buffer.
So to do this,
I have to set a breakpoint in
order to specify exactly where
I want to look at the buffer.
So I go up to views and...
"I'm going to set a breakpoint
right before GeoClear is called.
So that means everything's done,
it's going on to the next frame.
But since I set it before,
it won't actually execute it until…"
So I set my breakpoint
and I go up to the views.
Let's look at the depth buffer.
So, well, you can set slider here,
but I'm just going to use
the auto find min max,
which will, we can see that the min and
the max Z value that we're
using is actually very small.
So the precision that we're using,
this is a 32-bit depth
buffer in this case,
but we're only using a very small
amount of it from 0.9 to 0.9.
So we're going to set the
value from 0.996 to 1.0.
And what we'd like is for
this value to be a lot bigger.
We'd like to use a lot
more of that 0 to 1.
So let's go ahead and
figure out why this is,
why we're using so
little of the Z buffer.
And I'm going to set a
breakpoint on GL frustum.
I think that I don't actually call
frustum unless I resize a window.
Here we go, frustum.
And we see the frustum
is being set with the x,
y, or I can't remember what
these arguments are.
It's basically-- and then these two
values are the z min and the z max.
So we're going from 1 to 100,000 or
a million or something like that,
which is pretty large considering that
I'm only really drawing from 0 to 40.
So because of that,
that's making our depth
buffer look incorrect.
So let's see.
So I'm going to show another application,
this same application,
with the frustum modified so
it will clip between 0 and 40.
And again,
I'm going to look at the depth buffer.
Well, we can see already that the
water is looking much nicer.
We've got clear lines where we used
to be having some z-fighting issues.
So let's set a breakpoint to clear.
And we can see the depth
buffer automatically updated.
And we're actually using
a lot more of that range.
So in effect,
we've gotten rid of those issues.
And back to you.
All right.
Thanks, Chris.
That Z fighting is, that's,
that in the past has been
a real hard one to find.
You know,
we've got a lot of chatter on the
OpenGL list about my polygons keep
flashing in and out and to try and...
It's not obvious that your z-precision
is related to the GL frustum call.
The GL frustum has nothing
to do with the death buffer,
right?
So there's not that instant correlation.
Okay,
more of the application graphics state.
Profiler will capture all your
textures that you're uploading,
vertex programs and fragment programs.
And you can look at those.
and make sure and verify for yourself
with Profiler that you really did
upload what you think you uploaded.
And one place where this is really
useful and Chris is going to show
later is in your mipmaps because
you can get a lot of weird texturing
errors when you think you've got a
mipmap up there that you really don't.
This screenshot up here
is showing a cube map.
and what Profiler does there,
capture each of the individual
six faces that go on the cube
map and we stick them on a cube.
You can rotate that around and it
will show you which map is being
applied to which face of the cube.
So again, verify that you've uploaded the
right texture to the right face.
Plus there's a bunch of
information up there that talks
about the internal format,
the source format.
So when you're looking at
performance issues in terms of...
What kind of texture formats the
card's going to perform best with?
You can see, oh, well,
if I change the internal format and
ask for a different internal format,
you can maybe get better performance.
It shows the texture dimensions.
There's a mipmap slider down there,
which Chris is going to
get into more detail on.
and other little buttons and
things like that to show you can
flip the texture up and down.
Upside down.
And so with that, I'm going to turn it
over to Chris with ML.
Okay.
So we've got the profiler running here.
This time when we
launched the application,
just like normal,
we -- this time I set collect resources,
however.
And so this brings up the
resources window right here.
And so right now I'm
viewing the textures.
So looking at this application,
we see it's a nice sunny day.
You know, it's a sunset.
It looks pretty warm here,
but looking down at the ground,
it looks kind of cold, like snow.
But that's actually because one of my
textures isn't uploading correctly.
And so by default,
when a texture image is
not specified correctly,
it defaults to a white texture.
So let's go and see why
this texture is being white.
So we see, well here's a grass texture.
We don't see that grass texture in here.
We've got sand,
shows you all these resources,
I'll show you these, and like clouds.
And so the mipmap slider down here
actually serves a dual purpose in
that when you have mipmapping enabled,
it will let you slide between all
of the mipmaps and see each one.
And when it's disabled,
this actual slider here will be disabled.
So let's go look at one of the
textures we know is uploaded correctly
and go look through these mipmaps.
It looks like they're
all specified correctly.
So let's go back to the grass texture.
And we notice that these mipmap
levels have not been updated.
So to fix this,
either we could turn off mipmapping
for this particular texture,
or what I'm going to do is
just I'm going to specify the
mipmap levels for all of those.
And so I'm going to actually--
this is a great way to show off
the scripting ability in Profiler.
So I'm going to, on the fly,
disable mipmapping for the texture
so that hopefully we can make sure,
we can verify that this is why
this texture is not showing up.
So I'm going to go to
the breakpoints window.
This is where you can
set up your scripts.
And I'm going to have a script
that turns off MIT mapping.
So a logical place for me to do this
is after every bind texture call.
So by doing this after
each bind texture call,
I'm going to call
GL_TECH_PARAMETER_I with the target
texture 2D and set the min filter
to linear as opposed to linear,
mipmap linear.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So I'm going to attach a script
through the actions here.
Let's open up my script.
You know what, Chris,
while you're doing that,
I want to jump in here.
Sure.
You'll notice that whenever Chris is
up there looking for functions,
that he's not moving the mouse around.
He's typing on here.
Because it finds-- yeah.
Chris is a real keyboard-oriented guy.
And so we put in these--
Keyboard is good.
Yeah, put in these ways to find
functions passed by just typing.
Okay, so let's attach that script.
And for this particular script,
I'm going to attach the no-mitmap
script that I just specified.
I'm going to have it execute
after the bind texture call.
You can either execute before or after,
so I'm going to have it execute after.
And after it does execute that script,
I'm going to have it continue.
You can have it otherwise
pause and show you the state
after that script's been done.
So let's watch this.
Attach, and as we can see,
on the fly we've corrected
that and everything looks much
better than it did before.
This is a live demo,
ladies and gentlemen.
That just really worked.
Awesome.
So back to you.
All right, thanks, Chris.
OK, so let's move on to the
OpenGL driver monitor,
the second tool in our suite.
We can call it a suite because
it has more than one tool.
It has two.
OK.
The driver monitor is where Profiler
attaches to your software and shows how
your software is interacting with OpenGL.
Driver monitor attaches to
the hardware and it shows you
what's going on in the GPU.
Earlier versions of Driver Monitor had
these really bizarre,
obscure parameter names like Gart
Wait Time and stuff like that.
It's one of my favorites.
And we got a lot of questions like,
"What does that mean?"
We developed the decoder ring to say,
well, when you look at these arcane
cryptic parameter names,
this is what's really going on.
And you had to go to
this URL to get that.
Well, for Tiger,
we built all that into driver monitor.
So not only are the parameter names
text that's even sort of human readable,
you can roll over it and
it'll pop up the decoder ring.
For that particular parameter,
I'll tell you what.
You're welcome.
Uh,
Driver Monitor does remote monitoring,
too, which means if you
have a full-screen app,
It's pretty hard to run another
app on top of it and see it.
Actually, you can't.
So what you can do is run your
full-screen app on one computer,
and then as long as you're connected
on a LAN with a second computer,
you can run driver monitor on
that second one and monitor
the other GPU over the network.
Okay,
let's have a demo of Driver Monitor.
So I'm going to show the
Driver Monitor in use.
So I'm going to start up my
application just using Profiler,
just because it's handy.
I've got my list of applications,
and I've launched it up.
And everything looks good.
Let's bring up Driver Monitor.
And so we've got the list
of everything we've got,
of all the parameters, and by default,
whoops,
We can set use descriptive names.
By default, it will be like this,
and we've got...
[Transcript missing]
And you also have mouseovers which
explain everything that you'd
want to know about these things.
So here I've added,
right now I'm viewing on the graph,
the current free video memory,
the texture page off and page on data.
And so we see that right now we've got,
let's switch this to linear.
We've got about 7 megabytes of VRAMs,
8 megabytes of VRAM free.
And we can see that there's only
about 1 or 2 megabytes being paged
on of texture data each frame.
If you don't understand what
any of these things are,
you can always just go over
these in your free time,
set it up, figure it out,
pick the ones that you think are going
to work for what you want to figure out.
And so let's actually make
this window pretty large.
And we notice-- uh-oh.
This video card must have
more VRAM than I expected.
They really beef up these demo machines.
Ah, that's well... That's
just to make us look good,
I don't know.
Let's see.
So we see that actually we can see
that the current free video memory
is bobbing up and down and whoa,
let's go up to one gigabyte.
We see that we're actually uploading
texture page on data is reached,
it's about 400 megabytes per second
simply because I've made the window
so large and I've got multi-sampling,
all those nifty features on.
So it's taking up a lot of VRAM.
So, because I used the drive
monitor to figure this out,
I can see that it's a VRAM issue
that's causing it to slow down
so much when I'm at full screen.
And what I'm going to do is I decided to
fix this by using compressed textures.
which allowed me to stay
at the same resolution,
but I'm actually using only a quarter
of the memory in VRAM for these
textures using some OpenGL extensions
which allow you to do this.
So let's do that again.
And let's look at driver monitor.
We can see that the
VRAM has flattened out.
If I were using... Well,
it's a little bit faster,
but in more extreme cases,
you would see a huge benefit from doing
things such as compressing textures,
saving your VRAM.
And there's so many other
things that you can check.
You can see where your time is being
spent using the driver monitor.
So... All right.
That's it.
Thanks, Chris.
Thank you.
Quick words on what's new for
Tiger in Profiler and Driver Monitor.
You saw the single control panel,
you saw the decoder ring built in,
the new trace info stuff
for the call trace.
We're also going to--we've
worked on better integration
between OpenGL apps and Shark.
Okay, a lot of you have said,
"All my time in the Shark trace is being
spent in GLD get string." What is that?
Well, it's not really there.
We fixed it.
Also coming in Tiger, remote profiling.
So as with driver monitor,
you can hook up across a network and
monitor the GPU of a full-screen app.
You can do the same thing
with OpenGL Profiler.
So you can run your full-screen
app really in full-screen and get
the full OpenGL Profiler benefit.
You're welcome.
Quick note,
you need to have the same OS and
profiler versions running on
both computers to make that work.
Okay, now to wrap up,
let's talk about really your
performance issues is a balancing act.
We've seen here a lot of talk about
how you can improve the performance,
your GPU usage, and you use Profiler to
do that in driver monitor.
You also have a CPU in the computer.
So you need to be sure that you're
on top of its performance too.
So your performance improvement
cycle is going to work like this.
First of all,
your GPU usage might be very,
very high and your CPU usage low.
As a ratio,
whole app is 100%. GPU to start
with might be way up in the
high 90s and CPU down in 10.
As you use Profiler and improve your
performance on the graphics card,
well, now what's going to happen
is your GPU usage as a
percentage is going to drop,
maybe driving your CPU usage higher.
Switch over to Chud Tools in Shark.
Start driving that CPU usage back down.
Well, that's going to,
because it's a ratio,
that's going to start
pulling your GPU usage up.
And then this is a cycle.
And what you want to ultimately
get towards is where they're
just about 50/50 balance.
You're never going to, you know,
that's a perfect ideal you may not reach,
but that's how you would use these
tools in conjunction with each other.